NUT-00: add BLS12-381 (v3) protocol (#371)
cashubtc/nuts: 00.md

- Receiving user: `Carol`
- Mint: `Bob`

> Cashu uses Blind Diffie-Hellmann key exchange (BDHKE) for its blind signature protocol. Two variants are defined: a pairing-based scheme on BLS12-381 (the current protocol) and a legacy scheme on secp256k1 (deprecated).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Cashu uses a blind BLS signatures scheme on BLS12-381. The deprecated Blind Diffie-Hellmann key exchange (BDHKE) scheme was based on secp256k1 (legacy).
```

> # Pairing-based BDHKE (BLS12-381)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# Pairing-based BLS blind signatures
```

- Receiving user: `Carol`
- Mint: `Bob`

Cashu uses a blind BLS signatures scheme on BLS12-381. The deprecated Blind Diffie-Hellmann key exchange (BDHKE) scheme was based on secp256k1 (legacy).

# Pairing-based BLS blind signatures

> _Applies to keysets with version byte `02` (see [NUT-02][02])._

## Groups and Scalars

- `G1` generator point of BLS12-381 G1 curve group of prime order `BLS_FR_ORDER` (where `Y`, `B_`, `C_`, `C` live); points come from `hash_to_curve_G1`.

> - `G2` generator point of BLS12-381 G2 of the same order

Reviewer 2: You are naming `G1` and `G2` both the generators and the groups they generate.

Author: Good spot. Redefined the generators to `g1/g2` per BLS conventions

- `Fr` finite field of integers modulo `BLS_FR_ORDER`; scalars live here.

> `BLS_FR_ORDER` is the order of the BLS12-381 prime-order subgroup (the order of `Fr`):

Reviewer 2: Redundant
```suggestion
```

Author: Is it redundant? It's the core definition for `BLS_FR_ORDER`. Otherwise the number below it is just a number.

Reviewer 2: You say it right above: "[...] of prime order `BLS_FR_ORDER`"

Author: I removed the number and reordered the section

```
BLS_FR_ORDER = 52435875175126190479447740508185965837690552500527637822603658699938581184513
```

## Notation And Conventions

These specifications use [BLS12-381](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/draft-irtf-cfrg-pairing-friendly-curves/), a pairing-friendly curve, with a Type-3 pairing `e: G1 × G2 → G_T`.

### Types

Values are one of:

- Scalars: integers in `Fr` (the prime field of order `BLS_FR_ORDER`)
- G1 points: compressed 48 bytes / 96 hex characters
- G2 points: compressed 96 bytes / 192 hex characters
- Byte sequences

> Compressed point encoding follows the standard BLS12-381 serialisation. Hex encodings in JSON fields are lowercase, with no `0x` prefix and the fixed widths above. The identity point (point at infinity) is never a valid signature, mint key, or commitment.

Reviewer 2: What is a commitment in this context?

Author: A blinded message - I changed it to be clearer

- `B_ = r·Y` blinded message in `G1`
- `C` unblinded signature in `G1`

## Protocol

- Mint `Bob` publishes per-amount public key `K = a·G2`
- `Alice` picks secret `x` and computes `Y = hash_to_curve_G1(x)`
- `Alice` sends to `Bob`: `B_ = r·Y` with `r` a random non-zero scalar in `Fr` (**blinding**)
- `Bob` sends back to `Alice`: `C_ = a·B_` (**signing**)
- `Alice` unblinds: `C = r⁻¹·C_ = a·Y` (**unblinding**)
- `Alice` can take the pair `(x, C)` as a token and send it to `Carol`.
- Anyone holding `K` can verify a proof `(x, C)` (**verification**) by computing `Y = hash_to_curve_G1(x)` and accepting only if `e(C, G2) == e(Y, K)`.
- `Carol` can send `(x, C)` to `Bob`, who treats it as a valid spend of a token, adding `x` to the list of spent secrets, if the token verifies and has not been seen before.

### `hash_to_curve_G1(x: bytes) -> G1 point Y`

Maps `x` deterministically to a point in `G1` using the BLS12-381 G1 random-oracle suite defined in [RFC 9380](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc9380) §8.8.1 (`BLS12381G1_XMD:SHA-256_SSWU_RO_`), with Cashu domain separation tag (DST):

```
DST = b"CASHU_BLS12_381_G1_XMD:SHA-256_SSWU_RO_"
```

> [!NOTE]

> > Under the discrete-log hardness assumption, `hash_to_curve_G1(x)` is one-way and yields a NUMS point in `G1`, meaning no one is assumed to know a scalar `y` such that `Y = y·G1`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

Author: removed

### Optional: Batch Verification

`Bob` (and any other verifier) can verify many proofs in a single multi-pairing.

Constants:

```
BLS_BATCH_DST = b"Cashu_BLS_Batch_v1"
```

For a batch of `n` proofs, each with mint key `K_i`, unblinded signature `C_i`, and secret bytes `secret_i` (the UTF-8 bytes of the proof's `secret` field, the same bytes fed to `hash_to_curve_G1`):

1. Build a length-prefixed transcript:

```
transcript = BLS_BATCH_DST
for i in 0..n-1:
    transcript ||= C_i.compressed   # 48 bytes
    transcript ||= K_i.compressed   # 96 bytes
    transcript ||= u32_BE(len(secret_i))
    transcript ||= secret_i
```

2. Collapse to a single 32-byte challenge:

```
challenge = SHA256(transcript)
```

3. Derive each per-proof weight `w_i ∈ Fr*` by **rejection sampling**. For `i = 0..n-1`, iterate `ctr = 0, 1, …` until a valid scalar is produced:

```
h = SHA256(challenge || u32_BE(i) || u32_BE(ctr))
x = OS2IP(h)
if x == 0 or x >= BLS_FR_ORDER:
    continue   # try next ctr
w_i = x
```

> [!IMPORTANT]

> > Rejection sampling **MUST** be used to avoid bias. `BLS_FR_ORDER ≈ 0.45 · 2^256`, so each iteration succeeds with probability ≈ 0.45 (about 2.2 expected iterations per proof). This yields `w_i` uniformly distributed over `Fr*`. Plain `mod BLS_FR_ORDER` would over-represent some values by ~36%.

Reviewer 2: Implementors don't care

```suggestion
```

Author: They should. The bias is significant.

Reviewer 2: They just implement it how it's written in the pseudo-code.

Author: I shortened the message, but think we should keep the warning because implementors coming from SECP may not appreciate the bias in BLS

4. Group items by distinct mint key `K_k` and check:

```
e( Σ_i w_i·C_i , G2 ) == Π_k e( Σ_{i:K_i=K_k} w_i·Y_i , K_k )
```

> Implementations **SHOULD** evaluate the equation with a single call to a multi-pairing primitive; this performs one final exponentiation for the whole equation instead of one per pairing.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Implementations **SHOULD** evaluate `Π_k e( Σ_{i:K_i=K_k} w_i·Y_i , K_k )` with a single call to a multi-miller loop primitive, at the end of which they **SHOULD** perform the final exponentiation over the accumulated miller loop.
```

Typical batch scopes:

- A wallet receiving a token batches all v3 proofs across that token.
- A mint batches all v3 input proofs of a single `/v1/swap` or `/v1/melt` request.

A batch of one proof reduces to the single-proof pairing check above.

> The weights are public and deterministic; security does not rely on their secrecy. Per-proof weights are required because, without them, an attacker holding one aggregated signature `C' = a·(Y_1+Y_2)` could split it into two forgeries that both verify under a sum check.

Reviewer 2: Details not relevant:

```suggestion
The weights are public and deterministic; security does not rely on their secrecy.
```

### Point Validation

Implementations **MUST** deserialise all v3 `B_`, `C_`, `C`, and `K` values using the canonical compressed BLS12-381 encoding, and **MUST** reject:

- non-canonical encodings,
- the identity (point at infinity),
- points not on the curve,

> - points not in the prime-order subgroup of `G1` (for `B_`, `C_`, `C`) or `G2` (for `K`).

Reviewer 2: If I am not mistaken `G1` is already the prime-order subgroup. What you're referring to is points on the BLS-13-381 curve that are not fully in `G1`. i.e. they have a cofactor component.

Author: It's both - no mixing groups (ie B_ in G2 is invalid) - and no cofactors.

Reviewer 2: I am just suggesting you remove `of`. "points not in the prime-order subgroup `G1`".
Or "valid points on the curve, not in the prime-order subgroup `G1`".

Author: I added cofactors to the validation list and shorted the lim lee warning

> [!IMPORTANT]
> To defend against the [small-subgroup attack][lim-lee], mints **MUST** perform full validation on `B_` before computing `C_ = a·B_`; wallets and receivers **MUST** perform it on mint public keys `K`, on `C_` before unblinding, and on signatures `C` before any pairing check.

> > Use the library's prime-order subgroup predicate, such as `KeyValidate` / `in_g1` / `in_g2` (blst) or `isTorsionFree()` (`@noble/curves`).

Reviewer 2: Redundant, because you already specify the steps to validation:

```suggestion
```

Author: If I add a validation line for no cofactors, then yes, we can remove this. But it's such a significant bear trap for BLS, i think we should highlight it somehow

Author: I refactored and shortened the message
